URL: https://baymard.com/research/checkout-usability
Title: E-Commerce Checkout Usability Research
Publisher: Baymard Institute
Category: E-commerce UX
Scraped: 2026-02-09T13:19:44.971Z

Title: E-Commerce Checkout Usability: An Original Research Study – Baymard

E-Commerce Checkout Usability: An Original Research Study – Baymard Baymard Institute Baymard Institute Logo Product chevron-down document Research-Backed UX Insights 200,000+ hours of UX research star-filled UX Best Practice Guidelines Over 700 UX Guidelines ux-ray UX-Ray 2.0 beta Identify Your Biggest UX Opportunities components UX Design Examples 18,000+ Structured Design Examples filter UX Benchmarking Measure and Compare Your UX Performance Why Baymard? UX-Query Figma Plugin new Review Tool Personalized Research Training &amp; UX Certification Solutions chevron-down document Use Cases Turn UX into a revenue-driver star-filled Who We Serve Teams that make UX decisions Industries chevron-down research-industry-apparel-and-accessories B2C Retail : Direct-to-Consumer , Luxury Goods , Apparel &amp; Accessories , Footwear , Jewelry &amp; Watches , Eyewear , Home &amp; Hardware , Electronics &amp; Office , Mass Merchant , Furniture &amp; Home Decor , Health &amp; Beauty , Sports Gear &amp; Equipment , Vitamins &amp; Supplements , Automotive Parts , Toys, Crafts &amp; Hobbies , Merchandise &amp; Print-to-Order , Pet Food &amp; Care , Video Games , Educational Reading &amp; Books research-industry-digital-subscriptions-and-saas Subscriptions &amp; Services : Digital Subscriptions &amp; SaaS , Telco , ISP , Insurance , Online Learning research-industry-travel-accommodation Travel &amp; Accommodation : Travel Accommodations , Travel Tours &amp; Experience Booking , Flight Booking &amp; Airlines research-industry-business-to-business B2B : Components &amp; Machinery , Medical &amp; Pharma , B2B Ecommerce , Digital Subscriptions &amp; SaaS , Merchandise &amp; Print-to-Order research-industry-takeout-and-food-delivery Food &amp; Consumables : Online Grocery , Food Delivery &amp; Takeout , Beverages , Meal Kits , Consumables Subscriptions , Vitamins &amp; Supplements Benchmark Your UX Performance How does your UX performance stack up against industry leaders and competitors? UX Audit Resources chevron-down Free UX Research UX Articles 400+ free UX articles based on large-scale research Benchmarks 320+ top sites ranked by UX performance UX Design Examples 18,000+ annotated designs for systematic inspiration Resources Code samples, demos, and key stats for usability search Search for Research and Resources Company About Methodology Jobs Speaking Pricing Log in Contact Sales Sign up Baymard Institute Baymard Institute Logo Navigation Research Topic Cart &amp; Checkout Usability Research 70% of all e-commerce visitors abandon their shopping cart. Why? At Baymard we’ve tracked the global average cart abandonment rate for 14 years, and it currently sits at 70.19%. After e-commerce sites have invested vast resources in “first in mind” strategies, Pay Per Click campaigns, beautifully crafted homepage imagery, faceted search logic, etc., it seems almost unbearable that 70% of users – after having added items to their cart – then choose to abandon their purchase. Why is it that this many orders are abandoned? And what exactly can online retailers do to improve this sad state of affairs? That’s exactly what we wanted to find out. At Baymard Institute, we started researching checkout usability more than 14 years ago when we founded the institute and did our first round of large-scale checkout usability testing. Ever since, we’ve tested and re-tested checkout usability, running large-scale qualitative research studies testing the checkout flows of the world’s leading e-commerce sites, as well as conducting checkout UX audits for more than 150 leading e-commerce sites. During all 14 years of usability testing we have consistently found the design and flow of the checkout to frequently be the sole cause for users abandoning their purchase during the checkout flow. Either because users become so infuriated that they leave in anger, or because they don’t know how to complete one or more fields, and thus have no other option but to leave. This page provides you an overview of the results from those years of testing checkout flows with real end-users. All of this research is available as part of Baymard Premium . The Current Checkout UX Performance To accompany the checkout usability test sessions we’ve also benchmarked the checkout flows of 327 top-grossing US and EU e-commerce sites across our 110+ Cart &amp; Checkout guidelines, each on a 7-point weighted scale. This has resulted in a benchmark database with 30,000+ checkout elements manually reviewed and scored, along with 26,000+ best and worst practice examples from leading e-commerce sites (all categorized and performance verified). The UX performance scores from our most recent Cart &amp; Checkout UX benchmark update are plotted in the interactive scatterplot above. When looking at the general state of Cart &amp; Checkout usability, 65% of sites have a performance of “mediocre” or worse, 35% of sites feature a “decent” or better checkout flow, and only 2% are “good”. What’s more, none were able to reach a “perfect” or “state-of-the-art” experience. Thus there is great room for improvement. The average site has 32 unique improvements to perform in their checkout flow, to gain the 35% increase in conversion rate our combined usability test sessions show that the average large-scale e-commerce site can potentially improve through better Checkout UX. However, the nuances and diversities behind the overall mediocre performance are manyfold. This is a subset of the full benchmark which includes 327 e-commerce sites. View our full UX benchmark 7,500+ Categorized Checkout Step Design Examples FREE RESEARCH CONTENT Explore checkout design patterns across 7,500+ checkout step examples, all annotated and organized into 16 different checkout page types. This is a great way to get inspiration for your own checkout flow, and to get a feel for emerging trends in checkout design. Added To Cart Confirmation 147 Examples Cart 887 Examples Cross-Sells 188 Examples Account Selection 843 Examples Customer Info &amp; Address 973 Examples Delivery &amp; Shipping Methods 802 Examples Address Validator 207 Examples Billing Address 650 Examples Payment 1120 Examples Review Order 593 Examples Receipt / Order Confirmation 658 Examples Gifting 103 Examples Store Pickup 159 Examples Date Picker 37 Examples Time Booking Interface 39 Examples Application Form &amp; Flow 126 Examples Browse all design examples 70 Research Articles on Checkout Usability FREE RESEARCH CONTENT We’ve released a small subset of the Premium research finding on checkout usability and form field usability for free in these 70 articles: 4 Ways to Improve UX for Ecommerce Mass Merchant Sites April 29, 2025 5 Best Practices for Communicating Sustainability in Ecommerce April 22, 2025 Popular 4 Ways to Improve the Post-Checkout UX March 25, 2025 Desktop UX Trends: 10 Common Pitfalls &amp; Best Practices March 6, 2025 Popular See all 70 checkout UX articles 3 Checkout Resource Pages FREE RESEARCH CONTENT Beyond the extensive set or articles, benchmark database, and Premium research we have on checkout UX, we’ve also gathered three resources that are related to checkout UX that you may want to explore: Country selector A free auto-complete plugin for country selection. Abandonment stats A reference list of 49 cart abandonment statistics along with a reasons for checkout abandonments survey (lower on the page). Card number patterns A reference table of numerous different credit card patterns, outlining the IIN-range and spacing-schema. 17 Research Reports on Checkout UX PAID RESEARCH CONTENT All 110+ checkout research findings are available as part of Baymard Premium , and are divided into the following 17 topics (611 pages of research findings in total): Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Checkout Types Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Checkout Types 3 guidelines, 25 pages The UX benefits and inherent usability pitfalls of a multistep checkout flow, accordion checkouts, and one-step checkouts. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Shopping Cart &amp; “Added to Cart” Behavior Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Shopping Cart &amp; “Added to Cart” Behavior 11 guidelines, 67 pages The shopping cart page, incl. cart design, quantity and save features, the page response when users add products to the cart on the product page (drop-down cart, etc.). Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Account Selection &amp; Creation Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Account Selection &amp; Creation 9 guidelines, 49 pages Checkout flows for signed in users, users creating an account, or checking out as a guest, incl. account-selection designs and communication,‘Delayed Account Creation’, social media accounts, password rules. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Customer &amp; Address Information Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Customer &amp; Address Information 12 guidelines, 69 pages How to handle the form fields for all personal user data, incl. privacy concerns, shipping addresses, billing addresses, international addresses, phone fields, address auto-detection techniques, etc. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Gifting Flow &amp; Features Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Gifting Flow &amp; Features 5 guidelines, 25 pages How the checkout flow and fields need to change when users gift-mark items, where and how users should be able to gift-mark items, and how the actual gifting features needs to be presented to avoid issues. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Shipping &amp; Store Pickup Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Shipping &amp; Store Pickup 11 guidelines, 67 pages Shipping and store pickup, incl. the shipping method UI, shipping descriptions, order cut-off times, ‘Free Shipping’ tiers, how omni-channel sites best integrate ‘Store Pickup’ and ‘Store Availability’, and more. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Payment Flow &amp; Methods (Incl. Third-Party) Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Payment Flow &amp; Methods (Incl. Third-Party) 8 guidelines, 39 pages The payment methods interface, how to integrate and display an array of different third-party payment methods, the gift card redemption flow, and more. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Credit Card Form Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Credit Card Form 10 guidelines, 50 pages How to cause as few abandonments as possible, incl. the credit card field design, card validation logic and formatting, expiration date, security code, and cardholder name inputs, field sequence, card icons, and card type selection. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Order Review Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Order Review 5 guidelines, 40 pages How to properly design the final ‘Review’ step before a user completes an order, including ‘Place Order’ button placement, and necessary review data, along with the editing flow for those users who need to change data. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Order Confirmation &amp; E-Mail Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Order Confirmation &amp; E-Mail 4 guidelines, 25 pages The implementation of post-purchase confirmations, incl. the information and actions needed on the order confirmation page and order confirmation email. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Form &amp; Page Design Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Form &amp; Page Design 10 guidelines, 48 pages How to design and position the cart link in the site wide header and primary button throughout the checkout, minimizing form intimidation, avoiding multi-column layouts, using ‘Enclosed Checkout’ designs, etc. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics User Interactions &amp; Distractions Cart &amp; Checkout Topics User Interactions &amp; Distractions 10 guidelines, 37 pages How to implement load indicators, when to provide feedback on user actions, where to avoid ‘Apply’ buttons, embedding content from third-parties, and much more on interactive components. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Cross-Sells Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Cross-Sells 4 guidelines, 19 pages How to thoughtfully incorporate cross-sells into a checkout flow, including the use of active vs. passive cross-selling, adapting cross-sells to user context, and pitfalls of specific placements and wording. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Validation Errors &amp; Data Persistence Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Validation Errors &amp; Data Persistence 10 guidelines, 56 pages Error recovery and address validation experiences, incl. how to improve users’ ability to locate, understand, and resolve errors, and more. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Field Labels &amp; Microcopy Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Field Labels &amp; Microcopy 7 guidelines, 39 pages How to mark optional and required fields, appropriate label positions, inline labels, optimizing microcopy and descriptions, and marking of optional and required fields. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Field Design &amp; Features Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Field Design &amp; Features 8 guidelines, 48 pages The proper selection and assembly of form elements, inputs, and selections, incl. choosing the right type of interface, field masking and character restrictions, and more. Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Default Values &amp; Autocompletion Cart &amp; Checkout Topics Default Values &amp; Autocompletion 8 guidelines, 41 pages Intelligent form features such as making inferred selections, prefilling form fields, browser auto-fills, and personalization of the checkout flow — smart form field features that improve checkout UX substantially. See All 17 Topics Subscribe to Baymard Premium to access all of our Cart &amp; Checkout Usability research Get full access to all our Cart &amp; Checkout UX research reports, benchmarks, and page designs previewed here, along with our complete 650+ guidelines for Homepage &amp; Category Navigation, Search, Product Listing, Product Details Page, Accounts &amp; Self-Service, and Mobile E-Commerce. Utilize our 200,000+ hours of UX research to improve your Cart &amp; Checkout user experience and to document your UX decisions. Learn more about Baymard Premium Test Methodology This research on Checkout UX is part of Baymard Institute’s full 200,000+ hours of large scale research catalog, which is based on: Usability Testing : 25 rounds of qualitative usability testing with 4,400+ test participant/site sessions following the "Think Aloud" protocol (in-person 1:1 moderated lab usability testing). Manual benchmarking : 54 rounds of benchmarking the world’s 327 leading e-commerce sites across all 650+ UX guidelines (175,000+ implementation examples and 275,000+ UX performance scores). In-lab eye-tracking testing. Quantitative studies : 12 studies with a total of 20,240 participants. Baymard’s research methodology is described in detail here . UX Audit Service GET YOUR CHECKOUT PROCESS REVIEWED What are the 20 most important changes you can make to your checkout process? We will put together a 40-page report of the 20 most important usability improvements you can make to your checkout process. Get your checkout audited What Our Clients Are Saying “ Baymard produces some of the most relevant and actionable user experience research available. They really understand the needs of UX and Product Management professionals, and their deep experience in the eCommerce field allows them to offer sophisticated, nuanced insights. ” Kerry McAleer Former Director of UX Research at Sears “ Baymard has been a great resource in helping us improve the customer experience. We are continually applying these best practices to our sites. ” Bryan Trogdon Director of User Experience at Office Depot “ I can not tell you how much help your benchmark studies have been for our company, e-commerce and UX teams. We have used and continue to use these reports for baseline benchmarks as we build test protocols or eye tracking scripts etc. in lab. ” Catherine Brunson Customer Experience Strategist at Belk “ Thanks again for the great work on our checkout project. Our whole group found it incredibly insightful. We’re applying the suggestions you provided to our new checkout design which launches at the end of the month! One of my colleagues was also interested in your group’s competitive expertise with regard to responsive web and native apps. ” Jaime Wilson Sr. Director of Design &amp; Development at Overstock.com “ Thank you. This was an excellent piece of work: professional, thorough, and actionable for the team. We’re very happy with the work Baymard has done for us. ” Alex Wright Director of Research at Etsy “ Thank you very much for the 7 usability audits of our country-specific sites. The audits have provided us with specific and actionable advice, allowed us to prioritize development resources, and enabled us to compare UX performance between the 7 different country-specific sites, and against State of the Art implementations. The audit itself is done really professionally, and the recommendations contain actionable and insightful information. ” Mirko Sablic EU eTransformation at ​Deutsche Telekom / T-mobile “ Intelligent, consumer-focused insights that are clear and actionable. The team in the room really loved the way the Baymard Institute highlighted the optimizations in the various user experience elements (copy, layout, design, calls-to-action…), from the perspective of consumer struggles. Baymard’s Usability research really complements our other existing research tools. ” Will Close Director of A/B Testing at Nike.com “ Thank you, this was really insightful! ” Andrew Wright Product Design Manager at Instacart “ We’ve received some awesome feedback from our Merchant Success team as well as our merchants about all of the UX Audits we’ve had thus far with Baymard. Thank you so much to you and your team for all of your hard work. The pilot with Baymard has been going fantastic and I’m really excited with all that we’re learning! You have an amazing platform, team and super helpful data base for us to work with. ” Nicole Papp Merchant Success Manager, Shopify circle-plus See all 45 testimonials “ Having Baymard is like having access to a magical UX super power. I can&#x27;t believe how helpful and easy to use it is, given the vast array of tools and information they provide! ” Ariana Biedebach Manager, UX Research at Levi Strauss &amp; Co. “ Baymard&#x27;s audit services give us a detailed view of usability improvements across our entire site. This is so much more comprehensive than running individual usability studies. ” Gideon Ansell UX Director, Global eCommerce at Staples “ Clear, concise, actionable, data-driven insights! ” Dani Ibarra SEO Manager at Caleres “ I was able to bring these designed solutions home with me and kickoff multiple optimization projects that I am confident will affect the site in a positive way, both in usability and conversion. ” Nick Frame Lead UX Designer at TaylorMade “ I just wanted to take a minute to thank you for the amazing work on this audit. You should know that this has been very well received internally and there’s a lot of excitement around adopting the ideas you have shared. ” Sudeep Agarwal Growth Manager at Google Shopping “ Very thorough and professional UX review of our website, based on an extensive amount of previous UX research insights within the industry, and specifically targeted to our needs. We received both critical and, most importantly, constructive feedback, along with actionable, prioritized suggestions and best-practice examples. This will allow us to address the areas of improvement and significantly help ameliorate the experience users have on our website, which in turn is expected to drive conversion rates and reduce the number of customer service requests. We can highly recommend Baymard&#x27;s UX audit. ” Julia Fink UX Researcher at On Running “ Damn. The reports that the @Baymard folks do cost money, but they’re worth it. ” Steve Krug Author of ‘Don’t Make Me Think’ “ This has been fantastic: really good recommendations, really comprehensive. ” Bill Quinn SVP Digital at Hibbett “ The walkthrough today was great. The report was very, very well done and loaded with great opportunities for us to improve our business. I wanted to again express my appreciation for working with us on such a condensed time frame last month. You and your team have been amazing partners to us and we very much appreciate the work, expertise and partnership. ” Wendy Bonnstetter UX Director at Hallmark Cards, Inc. “ Excellent tool – looking forward to using it with our other sites and prototypes as they’re developed. ” Leah Kaufman Senior UX Research Manager at Lenovo “ We found the audits extremely helpful and validated a number of changes we have been wanting to make or are in the process of making, so thank again for all the great insights. ” Colleen Kersting eCommerce Marketing at Harley-Davidson “ This was indeed very helpful guidance and a very well-documented roadmap for us to fix, validate, organize, collectively understand and continually improve our ecommerce foundation. ” Cat Brunson UX Manager at Columbia Sportswear “ It is immensely valuable having a thorough, independent study to help validate my work and in particular, help facilitate buy-off from stakeholders. Baymard has quickly become one of my most trusted resources for the UX/UI field. ” Jason Greene UX Design Lead at ClickBank “ I found the UX audit a very comprehensive evaluation, with clear reports and actionable recommendations. Baymard&#x27;s commitment to excellence in user experience shines through its thorough approach! ” Giulia Moliterno Product Designer at AB InBev “ Thanks for everything. The audit was extremely useful, I think we have gained valuable insight. ” Tara Costa Senior Manager at Jarden Consumer Solutions (FoodSaver, Breville, etc.) “ This was…mind-blowing. We’ve been having conversations on the side as you’ve been presenting the audit findings. There’s so much to do! ” Ethan Leonow UX Designer at DSW “ These reports are fabulous. The content is exactly what our team has been looking for, and so much more! Extremely helpful, thank you! ” Cary Moody Usability Researcher at Hallmark “ I have found the M-Commerce and E-Commerce reports very useful, thank you! ” Josh Shaw Web Manager at Keurig Green Mountain “ I’m an avid user of your reports and recommendations. I have leveraged your articles and findings throughout my career in B2B, B2C, and hospitality. ” Jenny Urban User Experience Director at Ace Hardware “ The Baymard team has been a delight to work with on the JohnLewis digital platform audit. They responded to the brief very well, have been very accessible for ongoing clarification and queries and Rebecca was excellent in the recent team share, articulately presenting findings in an engaging walk-through with the wider team which will really support driving engagement and a robust response. Many thanks for all the effort and focus folks. ” Greg Woods UX &amp; UI Design and Research Manager at John Lewis “ The Baymard reports have proven to be an invaluable resource for us. Comprehensive, pragmatic and actionable. We have redesigned our checkout process and made changes to our category pages based on usability guidelines in the reports. ” Jill McDonald UX Architect at Room &amp; Board “ Thanks for this audit and your good work. This was exactly what I was aiming for. Also thanks for the very, very professional presentation, and answering all our countless questions. Very good work. ” Andreas Blank Head of E-Commerce at V-ZUG “ I just wanted to let you know that I think your site is the best thousand bucks I’ve ever spent. I wish I found you years ago. ” Chris Lambrinides Partner at Window Cleaning Resource “ First off, thank you. This was the most engrossed I’ve ever been in a 2-hour meeting. This [audit presentation] was incredibly insightful and very helpful. Many, many thanks. ” Yvonne Kim Head of E-Commerce at Ōura Ring “ We are very excited to finally proceed with the UX improvements, and I truly believe your audit report will be super helpful to put us ahead of the wave. If you ever need a reference, please do not hesitate to share my contact. ” Marian Gradl-Schikora Managing Director at Best Secret “ Baymard has helped so much: UX was a brand new role at my company when I was hired. I was researching, planning, and designing UX &amp; UI for 5 different products, all by myself. After showing real-world, bottom-line results from a UX centered approach to our products, we have expanded our UX team and greatly improved our UX-to-product process. Baymard’s research database was a critical component to my (and my company’s) success. Thank you! ” Geoff Jensen Head of UX at Wrench Inc. “ Wanted to thank you again for the checkout audit and walking us through the process. It was super helpful and we can’t wait to apply the changes to our checkout for a better user experience. ” Ramona Rejali Senior UX Designer at prAna “ The recommendations in our audit were awesome - well prioritized, actionable and helped us focus on what to optimize. This audit, along with the ecommerce database access, are my go-to resources for thorough, insightful information. Thank you! ” Erin Straub UX Design Manager at Nutrisystem “ This is awesome so far. Everyone wants to know what&#x27;s going on – you just got everyone&#x27;s attention here. Everything that you&#x27;ve called out is definitely eye-opening for us over here. ” Arthi Karthik VP Ecommerce at Party City “ Some time ago we purchased the Ecommerce Homepage &amp; Category report - the research and insights are extremely useful to us and help us a lot in our work! ” Eliza Savov CX Research Team Lead at Clicktale “ Given the tricky science of conversion rate optimization, it is great to know that you are dealing with professionals whose advice is based on solid research. It was a pleasure collaborating with the Baymard team. ” Aaron Henig Operations Manager at Epicenter Consulting, New York “ Within a very short time Baymard Institute provided 15 clear, useful improvement suggestions for our checkout process. We intend to implement all of them. It’s easy to find companies that offer website improvement suggestions. But, most companies don’t do their homework and don’t provide specific examples of how best to make the improvements. With Baymard Institute, the checkout process suggestions they made were intuitive, specific, and actionable. I highly recommend their audit service. ” Chris Hall President of RepairClinic.com “ This UX audit has been very helpful, not just for our design and product teams, but even for the UX research team, because we can reference back to the audit, either in the design of a user research session or when we analyze findings. Thank you very much; this has been incredibly valuable. ” Heather Vaughn Senior Director of User Research at Shutterstock “ The Baymard UX audit has been a revelation for our organisation and will likely become a vital tool in our process moving forward. ” Peter Fitzsimons Product Design Team Lead at CarTrawler “ Working with Baymard for our UX audit was an exceptional experience from start to finish. Their attention to detail, depth of analysis, and clear communication throughout the process truly exceeded our expectations. The insights they provided were not only actionable but profoundly insightful. I highly recommend Baymard for their expertise, professionalism, and commitment to elevating user experiences. ” Mehmet Cakir Ecommerce Product Manager at Monster Notebook “ The audit opened our eyes once again, as we are often blind to our own operations. The comparison with competitors&#x27; best practices was particularly helpful. ” Derrick Drakeford UI/UX Designer at IONOS SE Take the Guesswork out of UX Design with Research-Backed Insights Improve ROI on your UX projects and increase confidence in UX decisions like never before. Explore Plans and Pricing Free UX Research UX Articles Read 300+ free, indepth best practice articles based on Baymard&#x27;s deep UX research findings. Benchmarks Case studies of 327 top ecommerce sites. Ranked using 275,000+ UX performance scores. UX Design Examples Over 18,000 annotated ecommerce UX design examples to inspire your next project. Resources Abandonment stats, credit card patterns, code samples, and demos, for usability. Product UX Audit Service Get an in-depth UX audit of your site UX-Ray 2.0 BETA Identify your biggest UX opportunities UX-Query AI-powered UX research assistant Figma Plugin NEW Research-backed UX best practices in Figma Review Tool Expert UX review of your designs Personalized Research Custom UX research for your needs Training &amp; UX Certification Learn UX best practices Use Cases Industry : Apparel &amp; Accessories Business-to-Business Electronics &amp; Office Health &amp; Beauty Home &amp; Hardware Furniture &amp; Home Decor Luxury Goods Mass Merchant Sports Gear &amp; Equipment Toys, Crafts &amp; Hobbies Pet Food &amp; Care Direct-to-Consumer Telco Internet Service Providers Automotive Parts &amp; Specialty Insurance Vitamins &amp; Supplements B2B Medical &amp; Pharma B2B Electronic Components &amp; Machinery Online Grocery Beverages Meal Kits Consumable Subscriptions Food Delivery &amp; Takeout Travel Accommodations Travel Tours &amp; Experience Booking Digital Subscriptions &amp; SaaS Flight Booking &amp; Airlines Merchandise &amp; Print-to-Order Online Learning Video Games Educational Reading &amp; Books Footwear Jewelry &amp; Watches Eyewear Theme : Homepage &amp; Category On-Site Search Accessibility Product List Product Page Cart &amp; Checkout Accounts &amp; Self-Service Mobile Web Mobile App UX Training : UX Training for Your Team 600+ UX Certificants UX Certification Company : About Our Methodology Jobs Speaking Support : Privacy Policy Terms &amp; Conditions Roadmap &amp; Changelog Resources : Cart Abandonment Stats Credit Card Patterns UX Basics Subscribe to Free UX Articles Loading... Delivered weekly, ad-free full-length research articles, 1-click unsubscribe at any time contact-filled US: +1 (315) 216-7151 contact-filled EU: +45 88 10 85 58 email info@baymard.com © Baymard Institute 2026 contact-filled US: +1 (315) 216-7151 contact-filled EU: +45 88 10 85 58 email info@baymard.com Follow us on Instagram social-instagram X (Twitter) social-twitter LinkedIn social-linkedin